# Project title: CSV QUERY ENGINE



#### Project description

CSV Query Engine is a system that loads CSV files and allows users to view, filter, sort, select columns, and export results easily.



It is a C++ based program that works with data stored in CSV (Comma-Separated Values) files.



The purpose of the project is to demonstrate how a program can provide a user interface for the user to: load CSV; view the complete file, filter by conditions, sort by columns, select columns, and export query results.



The project was developed as part of the Computer Science coursework to practice file handling, data processing, and basic system organization using C++.



#### The IDE used

* CodeBlocks

#### 

#### Programming languages used



* C++ (console engine)
* HTML, CSS, and JavaScript (web interface)



#### Function of the Program

The program reads data from a CSV file and allows the user to interact with it through a menu-driven system.



**NB: For instance, a file named 'students.csv' was used as an example of a CSV file in this project.**

Some of the functions provided include:

* loading data from a CSV file
* displaying stored data
* filtering by conditions
* sorting by columns
* selecting specific columns
* exporting processed results into another CSV file



The system processes the data during program execution and saves output when required.



#### Features of the program

* Supports any size CSV
* Automatically detects columns and rows
* Works in browser (Microsoft Edge)
* Accommodates all types of CSV files



#### HTML Interface

The project also contains a simple HTML file, named 'index.html', saved in the web folder.



The 'index.html' provides a basic web user interface to display all the program functions and allow user interaction in a browser environment.



This HTML file works together with CSV files (students.csv, in this case) for demonstration purposes.



It shows how CSV data can also be viewed outside the C++ program using a web page structure.



#### File arrangement and location in computer

Project's files were saved in Computer as illustrated below:



C:\\

└── CSV QUERY ENGINE FEE328812025\\

&nbsp;   └── CSV Q Engine\\

&nbsp;       │

&nbsp;       ├── main.cpp

&nbsp;       │      (Main C++ source code containing program logic)

&nbsp;       │

&nbsp;       ├── CSV Query Engine.cbp 

&nbsp;       │      (CodeBlocks project configuration file)

&nbsp;       │

&nbsp;       ├── CSV Query Engine.layout

&nbsp;       │      (Store CodeBlocks window and layout settings)

&nbsp;       │

&nbsp;       ├── CSV Query Engine.depend

&nbsp;       │      (Dependency tracking file generated by IDE)

&nbsp;       │

&nbsp;       ├── README.md

&nbsp;       │      (Project description file explaining system purpose,

&nbsp;       │       structure, execution process, and user operation guide)

&nbsp;       │

&nbsp;       └── web\\

&nbsp;             │

&nbsp;             ├── index.html

&nbsp;             │      (HTML web interface for viewing CSV data)

&nbsp;             │

&nbsp;             └── students.csv

&nbsp;                    (Example CSV file, and dataset used by both the C++ program and the web interface)

  



#### How to run the program

###### **To open both the console and browser interfaces**

1\. Ensure the project's files are placed in the correct folders, as illustrated above, before execution.



2\. Open CodeBlocks IDE.



3\. Open the file named CSV Query Engine.cbp.



4\. Save, build and run the project's code.



The system automatically launches two user interfaces simultaneously.



* Console interface
* Browser interface

The user can choose an interface depending on the preferred mode of operation.



###### **To open the browser interface only**

1\. Open the web folder.



2\. Double-click index.htm.



3\. The page opens in a browser showing the user interface.



4\. The user can then interact with the program.



#### Encountered challenge

Understanding how to organize project folders correctly.

(Modifications and testing were sequentially done to ensure the challenge was solved, and the program ran successfully.)



# **END**







##### Student Details

Registration Number: **FEE3/2881/2025**

Name:                **KIMANZI ANTONY MALUKI**



Course:              **ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING**

Course Unit:         **COMPUTER SCIENCE FEE3131**

Semester:            **1**

Year:                **1**

